I know now that our sleep quality is
more important than our diet and
exercise combined when it does for our
health and also literally our physical
appearance everybody welcome to health
theory my mission in life is the pull
people out of the matrix by helping them
build an empowering mindset but the
reality of personal empowerment is that
while mindset is critical the body and
the mind are so interconnected that if
you don't get your health in order you
will never unleash your full potential
to that end with this show I'm bringing
on the world's most important thinkers
on a wide variety of health-related
topics so you can learn how to maximize
your potential
today's guest is the bestselling author
of sleep smarter host of the model
health show one of the most popular and
longest-running podcasts on health and
fitness and he's one of the top
nutrition experts in the country
additionally he's the founder of
advanced integrative health alliance a
functional medicine clinic as well as
someone who's been featured in
Entrepreneur Magazine Men's Health
magazine and countless other major media
outlets including ESPN he's also a
frequent keynote speaker for numerous
organizations universities and
conferences so please help me in
welcoming the man who cured his own
incurable degenerative spine disease
Sean Stevenson thank you for being here
man I'm very grateful grateful so I'm
super stoked to have you we've flipped
before where I had a chance to be on the
other side of you asking me questions
which is a lot of fun and now diving
into your world and I think virtually
anybody starting an interview with you
would start with the sleep stuff but I
want to flip it I want to talk about
sprinting we're coming around the corner
we hit that final stretch and your hip
breaks yeah what happened and then what
were the the knock-on effects Wow you
know this was make sure that this is
this is incredibly important for track
practice I'm coming around the curve
onto the straightaway and I broke my hip
and there was no trauma involved nobody
hit me I didn't fall it just broke
because you know cut to a few years
later I finally get diagnosed with this
degenerative bone disease and at the
time being 16 years old you know you
have the hormones of like a
Greek god you know so you know you get
the kind of standard of care you know
take these insides stay off the leg
you'll get better and I did but nobody
stopped to ask a question how can a
young man break his hip just from
running and once I finally got this
diagnosis it was it felt good to know
what what the issue was but also it kind
of sent my world into a tailspin yeah
that it's pretty crazy that it broke
it's really crazy that they didn't ask
why it happened but the thing that I
find most interesting in this story is
that you decide to ask the question what
are my vertebrae made of yeah and taking
that ownership which you must have been
like your late teens about yeah so this
is cut tooth so this was 20 years old
when I finally get the diagnosis and I'm
in college at the time and you know I
went from like a chronic kind of
nuisance of a pain to chronic
debilitating pain over the course of a
few weeks and this is important for it
and I always like to share this whenever
I can
my very first position you know he put
my MRI up for me to see and he told me
that I had a spine of an 80 year old man
you know I had two ruptured discs and my
vertebrae were deteriorating and so when
he says this to me
you know I'm immediately like okay so
what do we do like let's fix it you know
and he's like you know I'm sorry son
there's nothing you can do about this
and what happened and I know you've
heard about this several times the
placebo effect is something where you
get a positive injunction from somebody
who's an authority figure and you
proceed to have certain symptoms happen
or changes in your physiology and a lot
of people don't realize this but
placebos are actually 33% effective
that's the power of the mind but what he
did for me was something called a nocebo
effect this is giving somebody a
negative injunction that something bad
is going to happen and your physician
your physiology begins to change from
that and so I spent the next two and a
half years in a lot of pain a lot of
drugs prescribed and over-the-counter
and just laying on my floor you know
because not only was this painful but it
was embarrassing you know I went from
kind of being one of the cool guys to
like I'm walking around campus with a
back brace and just you know really kind
of losing myself I saw different doctors
I you know went through the whole gamut
of why me
this happened to me why won't somebody
help me and really playing this victim
role and it wasn't until I actually
decided to get well that everything
changed and most people never do that
with their bodies with their health with
their relationships it's mostly like
I'll see what happened wishful thinking
I'll give this a try but when you really
decide something you're cutting away the
possibility of anything else but that
thing and I'm a big student of lexicon
and the word decision is from the Latin
day meaning from and Qadir which means
to cut so you make a real decision about
something you cut away the possibility
of anything else but that thing and so I
decided no matter what I'm going to get
well and that said me and it wasn't like
you know the clouds parted and like the
sunshine and everything is okay I'm a
very analytical person as well and so I
put a plan together I decided and now
it's time to do something you know
number one put a plan together and that
plan until three specific things I
changed the way I was eating which
giving my body the actual raw materials
that it needed to regenerate me was
important and I was on what I called the
tough diet at the time which is typical
university food so I'm no joke I'm
eating pizza daily my vitamin C is
coming like from Sonny B and so it's no
wonder I was made out of like I was made
of terrible stuff you know and so I
asked this really important question
which you mentioned okay if my spine is
deteriorating if my bones are
deteriorating what what is it actually
made of and that set me down this
incredible path of discovery because
what we hear in kind of common culture
is you know if you want strong healthy
bones drink milk and come to find out
calcium is one of the least important
things and even getting it from your
diet it doesn't exactly work in your
body the way that we're marketed to to
because it's marketing and so I found
out that things like silica magnesium
sulfur bearing amino acids all these
things are in some cases even more
important so I start to get all those
nutrients in my body through food
primarily once I really got it like food
is gonna and was that so how did you get
that because that's where it's it's
becoming a lot more popular now but when
you would have been going to this people
and really think like that yeah and I
mean this is the time I was thinking if
I was eating licorice and it was fine
because it was fat-free right and he
said well I think if you eat too much
sugar it turns into
and like that didn't even make sense me
as like how would that be possible
yeah especially I'm from the Midwest and
so like there was like a Wild Oats
market whole foods just opened and so I
think it's really important the
environment you know and I had some
friends they would take me to the stores
and then you know that gradually got me
into like not just the supplement aisle
and so I just began to flood my body
with all these important nutrients and
also hydration oh your discs in between
the vertebrae in your spine and you
would think like if I want these to be
more hydrated I need to drink my water
but it doesn't work like that
your discs get hydrated through a
process called remote diffusion and so
literally it's like the last place in
your body that gets nutrients and
hydration and so you need to really
super hydrate yourself make sure your
body has an abundance like an overflow
of nutrients to make sure they get to
the right place so that was number one
was nutrition number two was movement
and so exercise is really about two main
things number one is assimilation and I
came across some research that showed
that when you actually are doing walking
while taking on specific supplements for
your bones your bone density goes even
higher all right because that walking
helps your body to assimilate number two
is elimination
you know elimination of toxins because
your lymphatic system which especially
when you're getting healthier your body
is trading out a lot of stuff and
there's a lot of dead cells there's a
lot of metabolic waste products and so
how do you get that stuff out of your
system you have to move because your
lymphatic system doesn't have a pump
like your cardiovascular system does and
you actually have four times more lymph
than you do blood and so that movement
was so important in healing and here's
the problem is that oftentimes when you
have you know an injury or an issue like
this we're told not to do anything
that's often the worst thing you can do
because things will start to atrophy if
you don't use it you lose it and so I
just started to Innis of course if
anybody's dealing with like an acute
problem right now like take a day or two
off but I encourage people to do what
you can in an intelligent way and so for
me I could barely walk properly and so I
started off on a stationary bike
progressed to treadmill I started
jogging a little bit eventually I picked
up the weights again and you know just
to jump really
to the end of the story I had lost 28
pounds in the next six weeks and the
pain I've been experiencing for
two-and-a-half years was gone but the
third and most important part now I know
was the rest and recovery right it seems
like I was resting a lot by not doing
anything but it really wasn't you know
it was a lot of suffering and my
greatest struggle was at night going to
bed because the pain was so bad it would
wake me up and so I was on you know
various medications and I basically to
drug myself to not wake up and so it was
like a pseudo sleep and it would take
several hours before I really like felt
like I was awake and the things that I
was doing during the day changing my
lifestyle showed up for me on the pillow
because what I really wanted to promote
for people is this understanding that if
you're not sleeping well you're not
healing well and this is where your body
releases the vast majority of human
growth hormone of the you know these
various anabolic hormones reparative
enzymes so when my sleep got improved I
got better so fast and so I shifted all
my coursework over to biology and
kinesiology and eventually opened a
clinical practice and you know often
times I would get those people who they
were told there's nothing you can do you
know you have type-2 diabetes blood
sugars 400 without metformin there's
nothing you can do about it and
consistently seeing these folks be able
to naturally regulate their blood sugar
oftentimes get off their medications and
some things like that because where
there's a will there's 10,000 ways but
it's also understanding that it first of
all just acknowledging that it is
possible hmm and that's what I love
about your story man that like hearing
you tell that the and I've heard you
quote the Einstein quote before that the
most important decision anyone will ever
make is whether or not they live in a
hostile or friendly universe which a
most people don't recognize that as a
choice or a decision and then to that
from that then people will take action
because they believe that they will get
an outcome how did you come to that
decision that you live in a universe
that's gonna work for you yeah when the
doctor is the one telling you multiple
doctors in fact cuz you said the guy was
you know conscious of going and getting
multiple opinions this wasn't one guy
they also
the same thing so how in the face of
that do you make that decision one day I
am going to get better I think it's
really valuable to understand the the
benefit of rock-bottom you know like for
me after getting those the words to meet
other doctors that you know there's
nothing do you know the same diagnosis I
had a choice to make
I'm either gonna buy into this and
continue to live as a victim or I'm
gonna do something about it at least try
you know but for me it's beyond try like
it's the decision right and so how I got
to that place really was you know I had
nothing to lose at that point you know I
can continue as things are and
continuing this suffering and I think it
was just a matter of like realizing that
and I think this is really important
even though there are other people in
our lives that might care for us they
don't walk in our shoes you know so when
the physician would tell me that you
know there's nothing that I could do I
knew like it hit me like they're not
laying at home thinking about me I'm
thinking about them and why they can't
help me I have to really take
responsibility for myself and it's just
basic logic you know if somebody's
saying they can't help you believe them
you know and so I made the decision like
if I'm gonna get better I need to do it
you know I need to take action it
doesn't mean I'm not gonna have great
people to support me along the way but
you know as Jim Rohn says no one can do
your push-ups for you you know so I
really had to take action and it became
you know and also I want to share this
is that if you really want something you
should make a study of it you know
especially if you don't necessarily have
a blueprint for a successful
relationship
make it a study if you're not doing well
with your finances make it a study and
how what does that look like for you I
generally go right to the medical
journals you know I dig through there
and another quote from Einstein is that
you know if you can't explain it simply
you don't know it well enough and so I
really strive to make sense of these
things that can be incredibly complex
but for no reason it wasn't until I
really honored my own voice and my gift
and helping these things to really make
sense for people and so I'll dig around
in that data and that's the first thing
I'll do and then I'll look for some
anecdotal
and evidence as well you know people
telling stories about it but here's
something else I do I also and this is
the scary part I also look at the
problems with stuff I also look at the
things that are against what I might be
believing most people don't want to do
that like we believe this particular
supplement is gonna work and it's the
best thing you know since sliced bread
and then there's these other things that
say hey wait a minute this might not be
the case you have to have the courage to
look at this - and come - and a truly
well evolved thought construct you know
we all have that opportunity but we tend
to just want to believe what we believe
and look for things to affirm that you
know you got to be careful with studies
that do the same thing and who's funding
this study as well so I really get to
that level most of the time in my
research it's really interesting to me
how and look like you said that look at
the benefits of rock bottom but it's
really interesting to me how early you
came to a lot of this and I find how
people tell their own story to be
fascinating beyond all measure and the
opening of your bio says the beginning
the first half of my childhood was spent
in an idyllic suburban neighborhood and
the second half of my childhood was in
the rough-and-tumble inner cities around
gangs and drugs and you said the power
came from both places and it really
helped me understand perspective how
much of that if it all played into your
ability to sort of see through the
trappings of everyone telling you it
can't be solved in a way that I you say
it's just logic but I think most people
fall prey to that and they live there
for 6070 years
so how much of that mindset that you got
from that sort of dual beginning do you
think played into it and that really hit
an emotional chord here and you say that
you know that initial environment was
really it lays a foundation well before
the age of about seven were in like a
theta brainwave state where a lot of
things kind of get deeper into our
psyche and our subconscious our
programming and so it's really important
especially for for parents you know and
people who are just that can be involved
in kids lives to really understand how
impressionable they are and so I really
got a great formatting kind of
formatting disc from my grandmother who
really kind of instilled this greatness
she instilled the value of education I
love learning like I love the process of
learning and so I really picked up early
on that you don't want to just learn
stuff you want to become good at
learning and when I shifted my my
residency you know going from this very
protected safe loving atmosphere you
know I'm in an environment where you
know there's a lot of abuse you know
physical abuse towards myself and my two
younger siblings
you know abuse with my mother and
stepfather in the fight you know
physical fighting you know holidays were
not like they are now like get-togethers
and family fun we know the holiday is
gonna be police is gonna show up you
know that that environment also taught
me something really really valuable
which is you know even though things
aren't going well even though we're it
was short on money there's always a way
to figure it out no matter how bad
things look we're gonna be okay so that
really was a powerful seed and combine
that with the the sense of greatness the
sense of the value of education the
sense of there's always a way to figure
something out really helped that that
moment of insight to take place of that
decision that the moment of decision and
this is the first time I've articulated
this but that's really how those two
things come together and I'm stoked that
you shared that that's um it's so
powerful and in taking you as a whole in
watching your show and watching on other
people's shows there's this incredible
zen-like quality to your delivery to
your mission to what you want to do like
everything about it is is so even keel
right because what I find with people
that make that transition is it normally
breaks them and one of the things that
I'm most intrigued about in life is and
we're just have the chills we were just
talking about this before we started
rolling camera where you were saying
with schools right do you go to one
ultra tailored or do you go that's going
to be the hardship where my kids have to
adapt and I don't know what's better
because the number of people that are
broken by the inner cities that the
centage has got to be absurd right in 89
TI it's just crazy yeah but the people
that make it the ones that find that
Center whether it's to be self-centered
or not they find that sense of self when
you said that that really hit me that
finding that sense of self not letting
the outside world dictate who they're
gonna be like now all the sudden
adversity is not such a big deal because
you've got like that compass inside of
you and you know where you're going that
feels to me very appropriate for what
you've become known for which is sleep
which even your own publisher was like
write a diet book and you'll be a huge
and famous and we'll all be rich and you
were like but that's not the truth that
needs to be told
yeah did that play in like was that a
moment of Shawn being knowing who he is
and what he's trying to do and he's just
gonna get to that end no matter what mmm
you know what
Wow yes that definitely was you know I
don't want to cut corners I wanted you
know it's integrity is a big word for me
and I wanted to take righteous action
you know this was this is all bigger
than us you know the impact that you're
making the legacy that you're leaving
you know is so powerful and we're part
of like a big change that happened
that's happening with our culture
overall you know and I knew that this
particular topic is and me being a
nutritionist like I was all like Food
Matters food first food is the most
important thing but in my practice and
seeing people coming in that you know
we've got these folks over here you know
80% of the time are able to reverse type
2 diabetes heart disease get off their
lisinopril and all this different stuff
and then we've got this category of
people who just like literally sometimes
would ironically kind of keep me up at
night like what is wrong like I'm doing
all these things right are they lying to
me in it it wasn't until I started to
ask people about their sleep that it
just like it changed everything and this
was about six years ago and so then and
here's the key I can't just tell people
they need to sleep more you know this
like people don't want to change that
much like we won't change but we want to
little bit right and so I found
clinically proven strategies that are
super easy to implement almost things
that can happen on automatic to help
them improve their sleep quality right
and once we did that it's like the
floodgates would open for people you
know had been struggling for sometimes
you know 15 20 years with their weight
finally the weight comes off you know
and seeing people struggling with heart
disease or high cholesterol you know the
so-called bad cholesterol and seeing
those numbers finally get regulated once
we got their sleep optimized and I knew
that this was incredibly important part
of the conversation that was left out
and as we will talk about I know now
that our sleep quality is more important
than our diet and exercise combined when
it does for our health and also
literally our physical appearance
fascinating stuff how much more fat you
lose when you get optimal sleep it's
it's insane that's a bold statement so
walk me through what are some of the the
just core benefits that I'm gonna get
assuming that I'm sleeping sub-optimally
like why is that a problem since that's
probably one of the most celebrated like
things like when you get a little sleep
people like champion you normally I'd
sleep 5 to 6 hours a night with no alarm
okay I haven't set an alarm in 15 years
so that's just that was my cycle I go to
bed early very consistently my diet is
on point my exercise is on point and so
I'd wake up feeling awesome yeah and so
I thought this is cash money but because
I don't set an alarm that my sleep cycle
will change and right now I'm getting
like seven ten nine hours out of nowhere
and super consistently and I literally
have no idea why I'm warmer now so I
used to be freezing cold at all times
and then at the same time that my and I
don't know correlated causative no idea
I've started being warmer while I sleep
and then during the day so what are like
the core components of sleep was
something bad happening to me or less
than optimal when I was only getting six
hours even though I felt good yeah any
correlation between those
he told us there's there's there's a lot
to unpack there number one what's so
interesting is that you you were doing
something exceptionally right as far as
what the research shows with improving
your sleep which is you were going to
bed kind of consistently a little bit
earlier than other folks might and so
what we caught what we call this is this
anabolic window or what we call money
time sleep and this is generally between
the hours of Tim and tube because it's
more lined up with their natural
melatonin secretion so if you go to
sleep during those times you actually
spend more time in the deepest most
anabolic stages of sleep and you tend to
produce more human growth hormone than
other folks so you were already winning
with that this is why you have a
tendency to feel better even if you're
getting less sleep because this isn't
called sleep more right its sleep
smarter and there are many people who
sleep you know eight to nine hours and
they wake up feeling like straight ups
you know hot garbage
you know what I'm saying and they're
just wondering why it's because it's the
quality of sleep and when I say quality
of sleep what does that mean let's break
that down so your sleep is regulated by
changes in your in your brainwaves it's
really fascinating stuff and we still
don't know really what sleep is trying
to define sleep is like trying to define
you know and Forrest Gump's like life is
like a box of chocolates sleep is like
pretending to be dead we don't really
know right but we do know the changes
that happen in the brain we cycle from
kind of a normal waking state with with
gamma beta but probably in beta right
now we move to Alpha Theta Delta is
where the deep anabolic dreamless sleep
takes place and we need all of them and
there's a certain percentage we spend in
each that helps to rejuvenate our mind
and bodies and if you optimize certain
things you'll do it more efficiently one
of those gearshifts like if you think
about your body like this kind of manual
transmission is melatonin like people
hear about melatonin is a sleep hormone
it just helps your body to efficiently
go through your sleep cycles and if your
melatonin is suppressed by various
things you know I'll share a couple then
you're not going through those
efficiently and you can wake up feeling
like a pinata after the party the next
day even though you're spending all this
time on the mattress so that's number
one
number two there's this interesting
process called
regulation there's a natural drop in
your core body temperature at night to
help facilitate sleep for all of us if
things are running properly but what was
fascinating and I shared a study about
this is that they tested insomnia
accident everyone in this particular
clinical study all had to high body
temperature at night it would not go
down and so what they did was they fit
them with these thermo suits right that
lowers their skin temperature not even
their core temperature just one degree
and virtually eliminated all their
symptoms of insomnia whoa
ambien can't do that all right and it's
as simple as paying attention to how
your body temperature influences your
sleep and so with your body temperature
changing like that it's kind of feeling
more of an insulation as a result of
having more sleep there's a ton of
different things it could be correlated
there so I'm not gonna say that the
sleep is a causative factor but it's
really interesting how your body does
change in a quarters of sleep there's a
natural rise in your core body
temperature as the day goes as I'm sorry
as the night goes on that helps to kind
of wake you up so what I did want to
share though when I said that kind of
bold statement in the beginning when
we're talking about how sleep influences
your body composition I think everybody
needs to know this there was a study
really blew my mind and this was done
the University of Chicago and they took
people and they put them on a calorie
restricted diet kind of typical stuff
again I'm taught in college to see the
impact on weight loss when they're
sleep-deprived or getting enough sleep
all right so they put the people on this
particular diet monitor everything one
phase that study they're getting eight
and a half hours of sleep all right
and then they track all their metrics
another phase of the study same exact
diet
same exercise they don't change anything
else but now they sleep deprived them
and they take away three hours of sleep
so now they're getting five and a half
hours sleep versus eight and a half
hours sleep at the end of the study they
found that when individuals were
well-rested they burned 55 percent more
body fat just by getting more sleep and
so the question is how does this happen
melatonin when I talked about this a
little bit earlier it's not just that
it's involved in sleep it's also
involved in fat loss in this study that
was done in the journal pineal research
found that melatonin production helps
increase your body's mobilization of
something called brown adipose tissue
right this is a type of fat that burns
fat all right the reason that it's brown
is that it has more mitochondria so it's
very energy dense right these
mitochondria just for people who I'm
sure people have heard of this but it's
like these energy power plants and
yourselves that are creating the energy
currency of your body like how you
experience energy the energy exchange
something called ATP and so when you are
producing adequate melatonin you're
producing and mobilizing adequate
amounts of brown adipose tissue which
just puts you in a metabolically
advantaged state all right but if you're
not getting the melatonin production
which you've got to meet two
requirements number one you need a
biological night so that means this
could actually be during the day but
it's a consistent cycle of when it gets
produced but the other requirement needs
to be met that you need darkness your
body produces melatonin exclusively in
darkness and so that's one also how did
it how did they get that body fat change
HGH
production which we talked about to
human growth hormone is muscle sparing
and it's a big driver of energy it's
also known as a youth hormone kids have
an insane amount of HGH being produced
this is why they have so much energy we
have a pretty sharp decline in our
production right around 18 to 20 but my
argument is that around 18 to 20 we
generally in our culture like leave the
house who might go to college that kind
of thing and we no longer have structure
we no longer have rules and we're not
going to produce as much HGH third thing
really quickly is and this is all has to
do with the diet and the food choices is
leptin all right and I know people have
talked about lefting before but Lefton
is your body's kind of glorified satiety
hormone and so when you're producing
adequate amounts of leptin you feel more
in control right you feel more satiated
but when when leptin kind of falls off
the map or you have leptin resistance
can take place then we're going to have
some pretty big issues with you
regulating your cravings your appetite
and so Stanford University research has
found that just one night of sleep
deprivation radically suppresses your
leptin and now I hope folks to start to
pay attention whenever you might not get
the best sleep
how're your cravings changed the next
day you're gonna have a tendency to want
a number one eat more number two who
want to eat more kind of the starchy
crunchy salty sugary type things and I
remember my wife who's actually here
when we had our son and I he's never
seen me eat this food I was sitting
there like waiting for the baby to come
I was eating chocolate-covered raisins
I'm just like and I didn't even realize
I was doing it you know it's like 3
o'clock in the morning you know and so
that's another thing and last one I'll
share and there's so many that create
that change in your body composition but
this one is incredibly important it's
cortisol cortisol has been drug through
the mud recently you know it's getting
blamed for everything but it's not
really a bad guy it's just misunderstood
all right cortisol is incredibly
important for example cortisol is
important for your thyroid to work right
and that's kind of like the metabolism
regulator of your body but here's the
thing just one night of sleep
deprivation radically increases your
cortisol and suppresses melatonin
actually as well but this rising
cortisol has a really powerful ability
to start to break down your muscle
tissue which your muscles your body's
kind of fat-burning machinery and so it
can convert your muscle tissue into
glucose it's a process called
gluconeogenesis as a kind of
fight-or-flight response because your
physiology doesn't know why you're not
sleeping you know must be some danger
about you know and so understanding
those major hormones and there's many
others you start to see the picture that
gets painted with just how much your
sleep quality impacts your physical
appearance it's really crazy I've always
known you need sleep but I didn't know
why and so getting into or transitioning
I should say because I always knew you
needed sleep because if I didn't get it
I felt terrible but that was sort of the
the end of it and I even let myself just
stop it though we don't really know why
you sleep but not diving into the real
break down was just really fascinating
so what are things then that people can
do to actually optimize their sleep yeah
this is what it's really all about you
know I like to start with the
low-hanging fruit first and something
really really fascinating is
simply changing or embracing the time of
day that you exercise can improve your
sleep quality and so Appalachian State
University did a really cool study and
they wanted to see what time of day
exercising various times a day hazard
impact or sleep quality and so they had
the study participants to exercise
exclusively at 7:00 a.m. and another
phase exclusively at 1:00 p.m. in the
afternoon another phase exclusively at 7
p.m. in the evening they compiled all
the data and at the end of the study
they found that morning exercisers spend
more time in the deepest most anabolic
stage of sleep so they're producing more
human growth hormone they have more
efficient sleep cycles or we've been
talking about they also tend to sleep
longer and and this is the one that kind
of can get glass passed on average they
had about a 25% greater drop in blood
pressure at night so what's what's up
with that that's correlated with a
deactivation of your sympathetic
fight-or-flight nervous system right so
you're actually able to shift gears get
to that parasympathetic rest and digest
calming down by getting some exercise in
in the morning and so how do we employ
this though that's the question because
some people is just like you know I
can't exercise in the morning and
there's also people who exercise in the
morning who might have terrible sleep
and it's because this is not like the
Magic Bullet this is a thing that stack
in your condition
if you're doing this and then messing up
the one I'm gonna talk about next you're
probably not gonna have the best sleep
so here's how to employ this just five
minutes and I tested this each morning I
do this 5 minutes of exercise you know
might be just jumping on a rebounder you
know mitten little mini trampoline for 5
minutes go for a quick power walk do
some Tabata which is just 4 minutes and
a little mobility work and guess most
people don't know it's about it is
high-intensity interval training
basically it's 20 seconds of exercise
followed by 10 seconds of rest repeated
over and over again for 4 minutes and in
his clinical studies this was found to
outperform you know traditional cardio
like the kind of moderate intensity 45
minutes of exercise in 4 minutes the
change in your cardiovascular benefits
body composition and also change your
mind
Andreea as well this is why it works it
does something called a cortisol reset
all right we talked about cortisol but
again it's a good thing if it's in the
right time and the right amounts
clinically I would call these people
tired and wire that would come in on
looking at the hormone panels and the
cortisol would be really low in the
morning and high at night thus they have
sleep problems so you naturally if your
heart if your cortisol is on a natural
hormone rhythm it would be elevated at
its peak in the morning right around 6
a.m. to 8 a.m. and then gradually
decline as the day goes does that have
to do with what time you wake up sort of
I mean the cortisol will kind of tend to
nudge you out of sleep but also will
tend to notice that as the day is that
your sleep goes on it becomes lighter
and lighter anyways right this when you
tend to remember your dreams like they
at the end of the sleep and so getting
this little boost like helping your body
to propel and get your cortisol up the
exercise helps to reset that rhythm and
get you back on track so that's why it
works so that's number one
low-hanging fruit just get in five
minutes of exercise start in the morning
no matter what just five minutes that's
all you need it's gonna help to create
this snowball effect of good things for
you you know five minutes if this is the
time you do go to the gym and do your
full workout so be it all good but
everybody who's not already doing that
just get that five minutes in and the
second one and this one is more of the
tough love and there's the most
difficult but this is the most important
one in our culture today and it has to
do with our tech all right so Harvard
researchers have confirmed that blue
light exposure from our favorite devices
you know iPads iPhones Androids tablets
televisions they do in fact suppress
your melatonin substantially because
that your body essentially thinks the
sun's out is that the problem
so we have photoreceptors that are
always trying to gauge what time it is
right because our bodies are wired up to
be in sync with nature but only recently
like literally just the past few decades
have we been able to manipulate and
basically create a second daytime right
so your body's just it doesn't really
know how to figure it out and so the
blue and white spectrum specifically are
the ones that are more similar to
daylight and so what it's doing is and
so here's what the research is found
basically
every hour you're on your device at
night suppresses melatonin for about 30
minutes alright so if you're on your you
know you watch a movie three hour movie
for example your melatonin is gonna be
suppressed if you go to bed right after
you're not producing adequate melatonin
for about an hour and a half and so
again you can be unconscious from sheer
physical exhaustion but you're not gonna
go through your sleep cycles efficiently
and so just be mindful of that what I
encourage people to do is to give
yourself a screen curfew just 30 minutes
all right I don't want to make this
complicated just 30 minutes but here's
the rub we are addicted to our devices
like straight up we just need to be on
it I am we all are you know basically
it's because of this dopamine loop right
dopamine is so powerful so interesting
dopamine is one of the things I truly
feel has helped to create our
civilization as it is because it drives
us to seek right dopamine drives us to
seek and to grow and to find to discover
the Internet is perfect for manipulating
this because every time you look for
something you find something especially
social media you seek fine seek fine and
produce the dopamine it drives you to
look but why do you keep going is every
time you find something you get a little
bit of a hit from your opioid system
it's like the slow drip
I have morphine and so it starts to like
feel really good and to the point where
you might be doing your work and like
you've got a deadline and you just like
I check Instagram real quick before you
know it's like 30 minutes later you fall
into the internet black hole just like
it just pulls you in so be aware of that
I'm not saying again our connection with
tech is just gonna grow so I'm not
bashing that it's just be aware of it
and that when you try to abide by this
principle which will really really help
your sleep quality to give yourself a
screen curfew you can't just sit there
and twiddle your thumbs because you'll
get what I call the internet jitters all
right you'll start getting like a little
bit of a withdrawal effect like let me
just check why it's one one post what we
have to do is this you have to replace
it with something of greater or equal
value it's really that simple hopefully
is what I encourage people to do this is
that opportunity
to connect right connect with your
significant other your kids the people
like physical like have a real
conversation with somebody right I know
it sounds crazy but it really works it's
really really good
and also this is a great opportunity if
you you know if you're in a relationship
or not whatever you're into you could
you know utilize and I have a chapter on
this as well
intimate time because there's a big
connection between sex and sleep and
there's also big connection between
sleep and sex and how it impacts your
sex life and so when we have an orgasm
for example we produce up chemical I'm
sorry cocktail of chemicals including
oxytocin norepinephrine prolactin and
oxytocin for example has been found
clinically to basically combat the
effects of cortisol and hopefully sex is
more interesting than Instagram but you
know I don't know it depends on how you
doing it and so that's what I want
people to do a screen curfew and or use
these hacks utilize some blue light
blocker blockers and so for your
desktops laptops things like that you
can get an app called flux that pulls
out the most troublesome sleep sucking
spectrum of light from your screen and
basically cools your screen off and it's
a simple app you set it and forget is
totally free just go to dr. Google type
in F dot Lu X and a couple clicks and
it's on your device I've been using it
for maybe five or six years I love it
and for your telephone you know your
cell phone we've got on the iPhones
built-in now is night shift with
androids the best one out there from my
research is one called Twilight you know
so there's options for everybody then
what about the ambient light at night or
if you're watching a movie again I don't
want to get don't get too neurotic about
it but if this is a problem for you and
you're not sleeping as well as you could
be or your results your body composition
not changing you're not getting that
blood pressure down you're not having
that focus you need through the day then
you might want to address this but
another little hack is to get some blue
light blocking glasses the first ones I
had was straight up like I just built a
birdhouse
but now there's some really cool stylish
ones that you could Rakesh it's a matter
of fact you'll create a neural
Association when you put the glasses on
and you'll start to get sleepy
it's nuts and that is another thing
right there is to create an evening
ritual right your brain is always
looking for patterns a lot of successful
people especially listening to the
things that you're putting out there
have a success ritual in the morning but
a great morning starts the night before
you know a truly great morning and so a
couple of quick things people can do is
the thermal regulation piece turn down
your thermostat all right now this one's
again this is gonna hit a pressure point
for some people but according to
research between 62 and 68 degrees
Fahrenheit is ideal for sleep and so for
some people that's gonna sound a little
bit frosty but lowering the thermostat a
little bit can it have incredible
benefit for your sleep but this doesn't
mean you can't use your covers and put
on some warm socks that kind of thing so
cooling off the star mist at making sure
that your bedroom ideally I call it a
sleep sanctuary and so that when you
walk into your bedroom at night if your
brain has a neuro association when I go
into my bedroom I'm watching television
I'm working those channels are gonna
fire because of the myelin getting laid
down over the years of you doing that
behavior or even months it can get laid
down and so you might have the intention
of going to bed but if your TVs in there
your brain is gonna be firing expecting
to watch television and parts of your
brain will be waking up in a way and so
I encourage people to get the tech out
of your room have your sleep have your
bedroom be a sleep sanctuary you know or
someplace that's just for the the SS
which is sleep insects here's also a
really interesting reason why there's an
Italian study done they found that
couples who have a television in their
bedroom have 50% less sex really yeah
yeah and you know this is a little bit
more middle-aged little past middle age
the people in the study but and I know
some people like it's not true have sex
all the time you probably do it at a
snowstorm it doesn't matter where you
are like you're a human rabbit it
doesn't matter but for other people it's
like a distraction right it's a
distraction and it can also you know
create all of those kind of chemical
suit issues that we've been talking
about with elevating cortisol and those
kind of things so I I deal II get your
television out of the room the the other
tech and last thing with the sleep
environment I'll share when I talked
about melatonin he goes through two
conditions biological night you also
need a dark environment and so if you're
in an environment where you're maybe in
a suburban or city environment where
there's like neighbors porch lights
coming in there's LEDs outside cars
coming up and down the street as crazy
as this sounds that it's that small
amount of light well we're now dubbing
light pollution can have a significant
impact on your sleep quality and here's
here's why we know this Cornell
University I think did the best study on
this and they took a test subject and
had them sleep in an otherwise dark room
and they took a light if I brought the
cable and a light the size of a quarter
and put it behind their knee and that
was enough to disrupt their sleep cycle
because your skin also has
photoreceptors that are sending
information to your brain your nervous
system your internal organs to try to
tell your body what time it is is trying
to figure it out you know so we want to
get rid of that artificial light
exposure now does this mean moonlight
stars no humans have evolved with those
things and their Lux like I actually put
a Lux chart in the book it's so small
compared to even the weakest fluorescent
bulbs and so get yourself some blackout
curtains if that external light is an
issue internal light you know your alarm
clocks and you know like you know lamps
you know some people still are sleeping
with their lights on and things like
that be mindful of that and also what
you can do is just change the bulb color
you know if you still have issues with
the dark which some adults do and that's
okay
you can change the bulb cover cup color
and I actually had some NASA scientists
or people that work with them to send me
some different bulbs because folks in
space they don't have that biological
clock and so they would experience all
these different health challenges they
had to try to figure it out and I knew
that it was a issue with their sleep and
so they start to give them different
bulbs for different times of day in a
way you know even though they're in
outer space so it's really cool which
you can do with these little hacks but
bottom line is you want to have a dark
cycle so you can produce melatonin and
you know those are just a few those are
just a few of the different things
people can do it's really interesting
because you've talked about
like the light behind the knee it's
you've got these photoreceptors and
they're communicating there's a lot of
signaling going on you've said that the
brain makes the body and then you've
also said that food is data talk to me
about what do you mean by food is data I
think that's a pretty powerful concept
yeah definitely this was a big
game-changer for me early on when I
realized that you know food the food
that I was eating wasn't just food is it
was information and every single bite of
food that I was eating and this is
something that I've been studying now
for over 10 years I absolutely love this
is something called nutrigenomics and
it's a study looking at how every single
molecule of food that you eat impacts
your genetic expression food is that
powerful you know in several other
epigenetic factors like sleep which
might be the biggest epigenetic
influence you get to choose what kind of
copies are being made of you you know
your genes are basically blueprint to
print out certain copies and there's
upwards of like 4,000 different
variations that one gene can do and you
get to have a big role a big part in how
those genes are getting expressed so
understanding that when we eat you know
a particular food it isn't just I'm just
eating this thing it's setting off a
cascade of events and it's incredibly
empowering but also can be really
sobering and again I don't want to give
people into the neurotic state because
I've been there but it's more like the
majority of what we want to do is things
that are hormone healthy things that are
healthy for your DNA things that are
healthy for your genetic expression
because you know you again you have a
big influence on that and so you know
early on really kind of having that that
light bulb go off it really empowered me
to start making food decisions that can
help me because you know if you really
think about this I had the spine of an
80 year old man when I was 20 years old
I'm in some ways I'm like Benjamin
Button all right like I'm aging
backwards you know have you guys talked
about telomeres yet on the show no so
telomeres are basically the most the
most valuable asset that we have
to basically tell us how long we're
going to live alright and so what do I
mean by that your telomeres are like
these little the eaglets at the end of
your shoestrings that keep your your
shoe strings from unraveling that's kind
of like how telomeres work there the end
caps at the end of your chromosomes and
as life goes on your cells divide and
those they keep getting clipped clipped
off those telomeres get clipped off
shorter shorter to the point where your
DNA basically unravels right and so the
crazy thing is that sleep your your
sleep spectrum you know whether you're
getting high quality sleep or sleep
deprived could be the biggest influence
on your telomere length alright so
literally aging you faster when you're
sleep-deprived so because you know when
you're younger were like sleep three
hours whatever it's no big deal and you
can quote get away with it and you can
but what you're doing is accelerating
your aging process I know that when this
was happening even before I got the
diagnosis sleep just wasn't like I
wasn't something I thought about you
know and so I was accelerating my aging
process little did I know another huge
player in that is the information that
we put into our body you know the food
and the water and also a big player is
our environment
you know our relationships the people
around us and if you were to ask me you
know sleep is the is more powerful than
exercise and nutrition combined on your
physical appearance in your health but
your relationships are the biggest
governing force over all of it because
that is the most influential thing on
the decision you make with your sleep on
the decision you make with the food that
you eat on the decisions you make on
whether or not you're exercising or when
and how you do it you know so it's
incredibly important to be mindful of
for looking at ways that we can stave
off the aging process stay young vital
healthy happy as long as possible we
need to be mindful of all of those
things and again I don't want to create
a neuroses today but there is a way to
go about it and I think that the
foundational piece is listening to
people like you you know constantly you
know every day getting that daily dose
of like getting your mind right getting
your inner game to
and immersing yourself in information
like this and carry that with you into
the world and do your best to get around
people that are uplifting you that are
supporting you in you being the person
that you want to become no question so
before I ask my last question where can
these guys find you online awesome so
the my big place that people find me is
generally through my show it's called
the model health show and so people
check that out on anywhere you listen to
your podcasts and I guarantee you're
gonna love it my home online is the
model health show calm so they can find
the show there as well we can find sleep
smarter there too and my social media is
there and also people can find sleep
smarter just you know where you buy
books Amazon all the good stuff where
you can go to sleep smarter book calm
nice alright and now my final question
if you could recommend people to make
one change but only one change to their
life to have a massive improvement on
their health what would it be you know
what's so funny it really does go back
to the last thing I said the number one
thing the very best thing that you can
do is to get yourself around healthy
people you know you everybody's heard
the statement by now you know you're the
average of the five people that are
closest to you it has a tremendous
impact and I always like to support
everything I say with science but
Princeton University did a interesting
study and they had individuals get
together and create rapport right just
basic little small talk conversation and
within just a couple of minutes their
brainwaves synced up all right they're
the frequency at which their brains are
moving literally started to match that
happens all the time you're syncing up
with the people around you so if you the
number one thing you can do to transform
your health is to get yourself around
healthy people get yourself in the
environment because it's very difficult
to go to McDonald's if you're with a
healthy person like you know you guys
like out you know just came from the gym
and you know they're on their way to
Whole Foods or whatever you like you
stop grab me a McCrea you know it's like
highly unlikely that you'll do that you
know just from a logical sense but from
this kind of even metaphysical deeper
level you really are a prod
of your environment and the great thing
about humans is that we're not just a
product of our environment we're
creative of our environment so you can
consciously choose that and that's
what's gonna help you to take your
things to another level I love that Sean
thank you so much for being on the show
man that was incredible
guys this is I'm telling you somebody
that you are absolutely going to love
diving into the world that the fact the
way that he answered that last question
tells you everything that you need to
know about Sean Stephenson he should
have said sleep because sleep moves more
books but he didn't he said being around
the people getting around healthy people
he talked about relationships because
that's the truth and when somebody is
far more interested in the truth than
they are in moving units that's when
ironically they actually moved more
units because you know that you can
trust them and they really build
credibility within their community his
show is amazing and that is but the tip
of a very large iceberg of somebody who
cares very deeply about actually helping
people and that's what you're gonna see
as you dive deeper and deeper into his
world is not only is he trying to get
things back to by science but this is
stuff that he's experienced in his own
life he's worked with thousands of
people in his clinical practice seeing
how it plays out with them he doesn't
look away from the things that disprove
what he believes in fact as he mentioned
earlier he stares right at those things
goes after them because he wants to
continually update his thinking which
makes him an incredibly powerful mind
that I hope that you guys will really go
and learn from because he has so much to
offer all right if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe my friends and
until next time be legendary
take care
[Music]